[Music]
Pushing upwards out of the forest floor
in the glow of the autumn light, we have:
a mushroom.
It shares the forest with the plants
and the animals,
but it's not a plant
and it's not an animal.
It's from an entirely separate
kingdom of life:
the kingdom of fungi.
This mushroom is only
one part of this fungus.
It's the fruiting body
grown for reproduction.
The rest of this fungus lives hidden
out of sight, below ground.
Beneath every mushroom is a fungal network
of hairlike strands, called a mycelium.
This is the body of this fungus.
A mycelium starts its life
growing from a tiny spore,
growing in all directions looking for food.
Then, when the conditions are right,
it grows a fruiting body out of the ground.
These fruiting bodies come
in a wide range of different forms,
but their job is all the same:
to disperse the spores and
grow the next generation.
However, only around 10% of fungi
produce mushrooms.
The kingdom of fungi is wildly diverse:
from single-celled yeasts
to pathogenic fungi hijacking
the nervous systems of animals
to the fungi who form complex
symbiotic relationships with plants.
We'll explore all this and more
in this map of fungi.
And like all my maps,
this is available as a poster
which you can buy from dosmaps.com.
If we zoom into the microscopic realm,
we can look closer at a strand of mycelium,
which is around 5 to 50 times narrower
than a human hair.
Now, here's a single filament of a mycelium
called a hyphae.
And here you can see the fungal cells,
and the cell components within them,
the organelles.
And these hyphae,
they grow from their tips,
sometimes branching out
to grow in different directions.
But they can also fuse when they meet.
And this makes the complicated
mycelium network
that you can kind of see
in the background here.
Hyphae got tough cell walls
because they contain a structural polymer
in these walls called chitin.
And this is the same material
that can be found in
the exoskeletons of
crustaceans and insects.
And this cell wall surrounds
a soft plasma membrane.
This is different to animal cells
which don't have a cell wall;
they just have
the flexible plasma membrane.
And this means that animal cells
can ingest their food
by engulfing it:
Pac-Man style.
But hyphae can't do this
because the tough chitin in their cell wall
means that they're not flexible.
They can't engulf any of their food.
So instead of that, they externally
digest their surroundings,
doing this by excreting digestive enzymes
through their cell wall,
which breaks down the surrounding material
ready to be absorbed back
through the cell wall
to feed the hyphae.
Kind of like their stomach
is on the outside of their bodies.
Interestingly, another source of food
for some carnivorous fungi
are the wormlike microorganisms:
nematodes.
And these fungi have developed
many different techniques
to catch these nematode worms,
either with glue traps
or lassoing them in rings
or by stunning the nematodes with toxins
before digesting them.
Hyphae come in two main types:
Septate hyphae
have filaments that are
divided into compartments
by cross-walls called septa
which got pores in them
to let cytoplasm and
some cellular components
between the cells.
Coenocytic hyphae
also known aseptic hyphae
are fungal filaments
that lack the cross-walls,
where all the cell organelles
and nuclei are freely flowing.
Essentially making the entire mycelium
one giant cell.
So on a cellular level,
it's really interesting
that the fact that fungi,
who have got these tough cell walls,
that explains why
they are the shape they are,
and why they grow these mycelium networks,
because being made of
lots of very thin strands
that all network together
essentially maximises their surface area
for trying to digest
whatever they're growing through.
And a consequence of this is a lot of fungi
look pretty much exactly the same.
They're all different kinds of varieties
of these networks.
Maybe slightly fatter, slightly thinner.
I think this might be why fungi
have historically been under appreciated
compared to plants and animals.
When you look at
different plants or animals,
you can tell that they're different species
just by looking at them.
Their morphologies are different.
You know,
that's a squirrel, that's a giraffe.
But with fungi, unless you're an expert,
they all look kind of the same.
But different kinds of fungi
specialise in breaking down
different materials for food,
using a massive range
of different chemicals
depending on the species.
So the diversity of fungi is
in their chemistry and metabolism
rather than their shape.
Historically, people thought
fungi were a kind of plant
which kind of makes sense,
because a lot of fungi grow in the soil,
they form these sort of networks
which look a bit like roots
and they don't move around:
they're not mobile.
But now we know fungi are actually
an entirely different kingdom of life,
separate to plants and animals.
And they're actually more closely related
to animals than plants.
Today, the main way to tell the difference
between species of fungus
is by sequencing their genetics
using molecular barcoding methods.
This modern technology has unlocked
a whole new way to discover and study fungi
and untangle their evolutionary
relationships between species.
Mycologists have discovered
about 150,000 species of fungi,
but they estimate there are
2 or 3 million species out in nature
waiting to be discovered
with potentially very useful
chemical behaviours
for new drugs or technologies.
We'll look at the fascinating
chemistry of fungi soon,
but first I need to mention yeast.
Some species of fungi
only grow as single-celled yeasts.
And these reproduce by
a kind of cell division
called budding or fission.
But some fungi can switch between
living as a yeast or living as a hyphae
depending on the environment
they find themselves in.
We also get yeasts living on us,
which we'll find out about later.
Fungi are found in just about
every environment on Earth,
on land and in the water,
and they've been found in
extreme environments like deserts
or areas with high concentrations
of salt or radiation.
Some can even survive
the intense radiation of space.
Fungi are essential for the decomposition
of organic matter,
breaking it down and cycling the nutrients
back through the environment.
The organic acids or enzymes hyphae release
breaks down material as they grow,
allowing them to grow through
just about any material,
leaves, soil, wood, rock, even asphalt.
Deep in the past, 290 million years ago,
a fungus related to the white rot fungus
developed special enzymes
which gave it the ability to break down
the tough lignin in plant matter.
Before this, nothing could
break down this tough molecule.
So, plant matter would just be buried
and compressed over time,
eventually turning into coal.
So, a fungus basically stopped
the Earth's production of coal
290 million years ago.
Most life on Earth has some kind
of symbiotic relationship
with some kind of fungi.
These relationships can be
mutually beneficial
where both the fungus and the partner
benefit from the relationship.
For example, leaf cutter ants
are like fungus farmers,
feeding their fungal gardens with leaves,
while protecting them from pests and moulds.
In return, the fungus is a food source
for the ants' larvae.
Another hugely important
mutually beneficial relationship
exists between plant roots and fungi.
This relationship is called mycorrhiza.
90% of all plants rely on mycorrhiza
for nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus
which fungi extract from the soil.
And in return, the plant
supplies the fungus
with food like carbohydrates,
which the plant produces in photosynthesis.
There are two main kinds of mycorrhiza.
Arbuscular mycorrhiza
penetrate the plant's root cells
to exchange nutrients.
Whereas ectomycorrhiza
penetrate between the plant cells
but not inside them.
Interestingly, the mycelium network
of a fungus
can connect to multiple different plants
through their mycorrhiza.
And this is called
a mycorrhizal network
and this effectively connects plants
to each other through their roots,
potentially giving them a route to
exchange information with each other.
So, some studies suggest that plants
can give each other warnings
if they're being attacked
by insects or pathogens,
or they can even transfer
resources to each other,
if one is, you know, not doing so well.
But I should say this is still
an active area of research
and there's still some debate
about how much
plants use this mechanism
to communicate with each other.
I should also say that
these mycorrhiza aren't always
mutually beneficial.
Some fungi can switch
to a pathogenic mode
where they're leeching off the plant,
or they can just be commensal
and not really do anything.
Now let's look at lichens
which are made of
a combination of fungi
along with algae or cyanobacteria
all living in a
symbiotic relationship.
Lichens are really important
because they're the first organisms
to establish themselves
in a new environment
like when a glacier retreats
or when volcanic rock covers an area.
They contribute to soil formation
by breaking down rock
and adding nutrients to the soil.
Fungi have also been found
living harmlessly inside plants.
These are known as endophytes
and can live inside a plant
for all or just part of their life cycles.
Some endophytes
may even help the host plant
by enhancing growth
or helping tolerate stresses
like drought
or increase the resistance
to insects or pathogens.
But of course, many fungi
are pathogens themselves.
Although plants have got
many beneficial relationships with fungi,
by far the most common
and damaging pathogens
that plants face,
are also fungi.
They're far more damaging
than viruses, bacteria, or even insects.
Pathogenic fungal infections
can damage plants
by destroying cells,
blocking the vascular tissues
that carry water,
releasing toxins,
and growing over leaves,
stopping them from photosynthesising.
Rusts, smuts, moulds, and mildews
are all common names
for fungal plant pathogens,
which can cause major losses
to crop yields worldwide.
Hundreds of billions of dollars
worth of wheat and barley
are lost each year
because of Fusarium graminearum.
And in the 1950s, an entire
species of banana was wiped out
by the related species called
Fusarium oxysporum.
And this is now threatening
the modern variety, too.
And wood imported from Asia is thought
to be the origin of Dutch elm disease
which has wiped out most of the elm trees
in temperate Europe and North America.
There are countless other examples of
fungal pathogens that prey on plants.
But they also infect animals too,
sometimes in the most ghoulish ways.
These are called entomogenous fungi.
The zombie ant fungus,
Ophiocordyceps unilateralis,
infects ants by piercing
the exoskeleton with enzymes
and spreads fungal cells
throughout the body.
It then secretes special
neurological compounds
that hijack the ant's
central nervous system,
forcing it to climb high into a tree
and lock its mandibles onto a leaf
with a death grip.
This makes a nice stable platform
for the fungus to grow a fruiting body
to disperse spores in a large area
to infect more hosts.
This is the kind of crazy biology
that inspired the zombies
in The Last of Us.
And they're not alone.
There are many different pathogenic fungi
that infect other insects and spiders.
But there is a really positive side
to this fascinating biochemistry.
When a fungus infects an arthropod,
it needs to suppress
the immune system of its host.
So it secretes immunosuppressing chemicals.
And fortunately, these chemical compounds
also work in humans
and have been developed into drugs
that make organ transplantation possible.
This is just one of a host of drugs
that have been developed from fungi
and their complex biochemistry.
In fact, fungi arguably produce
some of the most important drugs
ever discovered.
They include statins,
which are a group of fungal chemicals
extracted from a mould,
which have been found to interfere
with fat production
and have been synthesised
to treat high cholesterol
and cardiovascular diseases.
In the wild, fungi fight with each other
for resources.
So, drugs that come from fungi have also
been shown to treat fungal infections.
They've also been shown to inhibit viruses,
have anti-tumour compounds
used in cancer treatments.
They've also been used in vaccines,
and are used as a treatment for MS.
But arguably the biggest impact
of fungi on medicine
is their ability to kill bacteria.
The first modern antibiotic, penicillin,
was first used in 1930
to treat an eye infection
in newborn babies.
But it only found widespread use
at the end of the Second World War
when scientists finally figured out
how to synthesise it on mass
using fermentation.
This was the beginning
of the antibiotic revolution.
And since then, hundreds of millions
of lives have been saved
because of antibiotics
derived from fungi.
Now, there's a very good reason
why fungi produce antibacterial compounds.
They often live side by side
and compete for food and space.
So fungi produce antibiotic compounds
as a natural defence mechanism,
to kill bacteria or inhibit their growth.
And because fungi
digest their food externally,
excreting digestive enzymes
outside their body
to break down their food,
they then need to protect that food
from other organisms
while they absorb it.
This is amazing footage showing bacteria
swimming in the liquid surrounding hyphae.
These have been called fungal highways
and are probably essential
for healthy soil.
In fact, fungi release many other compounds
for attack and defence,
feeding, communication,
and other functions
we don't yet understand.
Because of their amazing biochemistry,
we found many other uses for fungi.
They're used in bioremediation
by breaking down insecticides, herbicides,
and other pollutants like crude oil,
polyurethane plastics,
even explosive TNT.
They may even be useful for bioremediation
of radioactively polluted sites
as they've got the ability
to absorb heavy metals
including radioactive material.
They've also been used in agriculture,
for biological control of pests
like locusts which threaten food harvests.
And they're used extensively to produce
industrial chemicals like acids,
detergents and ethanol, amongst others.
60% of enzymes used in industry
are generated by fungi.
And all of the citric acid
used in soft drinks is made by fungi.
And the strong mycelium can be used
to build materials and textiles
to replace plastics and leathers.
Because of their ability to concentrate
nutrients from within the soil,
fungi are an excellent source of food
for us and many other animals.
Today, the global market for edible fungi
is worth about 32 billion pounds
with about 350 species of fungi
collected or cultivated for food.
Foraging for mushrooms is a fun activity,
but there is a risk of poisoning.
Although surprisingly,
few fungi are truly toxic.
Only 120 out of 22,000 mushroom
producing species could kill you.
The problem is several
of these deadly varieties
look very similar to edible mushrooms,
making it easy to make a fatal mistake.
And some fungal poisons
are heat stable, too.
So, the mushroom stays poisonous
even after you cook it.
The purpose of these toxic chemical
compounds is still being figured out,
but they're likely to be
a deterrent and defence
against the mushroom being eaten before
it's completed the job of producing spores.
Some of the defensive chemicals
that fungi produce
have a psychotropic effect,
notably psilocybin in magic mushrooms.
And also LSD was first derived
from the urgot fungus.
In all, around 150
mushroom producing species
have got hallucinogenic properties.
And despite these species also being toxic,
human consumption of these fungi
goes back at least 3,000 years.
And have formed the basis for
a number of ancient cultural rituals.
In the clinical setting,
psychotropics are being studied
for their potential in treating
chronic depression and PTSD.
These studies appear to show
that psilocybin
causes a temporary increase
in communication
between different parts of the brain.
But fungi provide us with more
than just  mushrooms for food.
Humans have been using yeast
to preserve or ferment food and drinks
for over 10,000 years.
Fermentation is a metabolic pathway
yeast uses in oxygen limited conditions
to break down sugars and generate energy
producing byproducts
like ethanol and carbon dioxide
as well as many other compounds
like phenols and esters
which produce the delicious
flavours and smells.
Fermentation is used in baking bread,
brewing beer, wine,
and many other alcoholic drinks,
and can also be used
in a number of other fermented foods
like tofu, soy sauce, chocolate, coffee,
and some types of yogurt and cheese,
amongst many others.
But while we're feeding on fungi,
there are fungi feeding on us.
Humans host a staggering variety of fungi,
mostly in a commensal relationship
where they do neither harm nor good to us.
For instance, the basidiomycete yeast
Malassezia
is a natural inhabitant of human skin
where it feeds off the oils in sebum
in our sebaceous glands
and tends to thrive in teenagers
when puberty increases
the production of these oils.
While usually harmless, Malassezia
is associated with several skin conditions
including dandruff amongst others.
And other dermaphytes can cause
other conditions, like athletes foot.
However, while we can coexist
with these fungi
without giving them a second thought,
under the right conditions,
they can quickly become pathogens,
causing our bodies harm.
On our body, we also have
species of Candida,
which normally don't cause us any harm.
But they're also opportunistic pathogens,
affecting mucous membranes
and causing thrush.
Usually, fungal infections are only
really a nuisance to humans
who are otherwise healthy.
But they can cause serious complications
if they're already ill.
When it comes to reproduction,
fungi are again quite unusual,
because many of them can reproduce
both sexually and asexually.
This means they can either find a partner
to mix genes with to make new offspring,
or they can just clone themselves.
Although plants can do this as well.
The advantage of cloning
is that it's very quick:
just simple cell division.
But sexual reproduction
improves diversity within a population,
which is an advantage
over asexual reproduction,
to explore more ecological niches.
Interestingly, while many fungi
have got two sexes,
like us humans,
some fungi can have hundreds
to thousands of different sexes.
They all look the same,
but the fungi are able to
chemically detect
the sex of a neighbour
and if they're compatible or not.
And scientists have built
a massive spreadsheet
to keep track of who can
get it on with who.
All fungi disperse themselves
by producing microscopic spores.
But these spores vary massively
in shape, size, and colour.
The size, shape, and features of spores
are built to take advantage of
many different methods of dispersal.
Primitive fungi have whip-like tails,
called flagella,
to disperse through watery environments.
Others disperse in the air
from the gills
on the undersides of mushrooms.
Others are rejected at great speeds
from the fruiting bodies.
And others are specifically adapted
to be picked up or eaten
by insects, birds, or mammals.
Like truffles, whose fruiting bodies
grow below ground,
but communicate with the above world
by releasing a special aroma
that attracts mammals.
Something we enjoy as well.
The aroma is the sex pheromones
of male pigs...
Delightful...
Probably the least known effect of fungi
in the environment
is their role in the formation
of clouds and rains.
As fungal spores can trigger
the formation of water droplets,
causing rains which land
on the tree canopy or forest floor
and this helps maintain
the forest microclimate.
Finally, evolution.
This is our current picture
of the fungal tree of life
which contains eight main branches.
We think the earliest fungi evolved
around a billion years ago,
and were simple single-celled organisms
that lived in the sea.
As mentioned before,
one of the key signatures of a fungus
is containing chitin in their cell walls.
This can be difficult to detect,
but detailed studies have shown that
downy mildews, and water moulds,
and slime moulds
don't have chitin,
and so aren't fungi.
But the single-celled
Cryptomycota and Microsporidia do,
making them the fungi that exist today
that most resemble
the earliest forms of fungi.
They're also exclusively parasites.
These along with
Blastocladiomycota and Chytridiomycota
reproduce using a mobile spore
with a whip-like tail,
called a flagellum.
Which allows them to move through water,
just like a human sperm cell.
This mobile spore was lost
when fungi moved onto the land
around 700 million years ago,
and then evolved the other ways
of dispersing spores.
Zoopagomycota are almost exclusively
pathogens or parasites
which infect or feed off
plants or animals,
or they live within plants or animals
without harming them.
Mucoromycota are known for forming
relationships with plants
that are mutually beneficial
to the plant and fungi.
This group contains the subphylum
Glomeromycota
which forms the micorrhizal relationships
with about 80% of land plants
including most crops.
They also harbour a large diversity
of bacteria
that live inside the fungal cells.
And finally,
the Ascomycota and Basidiomycota
which together forms the
subkingdom Dikarya.
Ascomycets are commonly known
as the sac fungi,
and include morels, truffles,
brewer's and baker's yeasts,
as well as the majority
of fungal symbionts in lichens.
Whereas Basidiomycets
are perhaps the most familiar to us,
as they contain the fungi
who grow into the majority of mushrooms.
So that's an overall view
of the world of fungi,
visualised in this map.
I find visuals really help me
learn new information,
which is why Brilliant is a really helpful
tool to learn STEM subjects.
And it's really similar to my channel,
in that it uses art and graphic design
to help you get your head around
complex subjects.
But they have the benefit
of being interactive
through their app or website.
They've got loads of amazing
tools and visualisations.
So if you want to learn how AI works,
you can see how visual
and language models are built.
Want to learn mathematics?
There are courses which visualise
equations and algebra.
Want to learn programming?
There's loads of
interactive courses for that.
And they've got many other subjects too.
So, this is the link to
find your favourite subject:
brilliant.org/dos/
And this link tells Brilliant
that you came from here,
which also helps me out too.
Also, if you use my link,
you can get a 20% discount
off the premium subscription,
which gives you unlimited daily access
to everything on Brilliant.
I highly recommend giving it a try.
Links are in the description below.
If you want to get your hands
on the Map of Fungi,
this is the best place to go:
domaps.com.
That directs you to
which store is best to buy it from,
depending on your region.
Thanks for watching
and check out my channel
for loads more maps of different areas
of human knowledge.